Add Basic Operations with the Charm (#947)
canonical/k8s-snap: docs/src/charm/tutorial/basic-operations.md

# Basic {{ product }} charm operations

This tutorial walks you through common management tasks for your {{ product }}
cluster using the `k8s` control plane charm. You will learn how to scale your
cluster, manage workers, and interact with the cluster using `kubectl`.

## Prerequisites

- A running {{ product }} cluster deployed with the `k8s` charm
- The Juju [client][Juju client]
- [Kubectl] (installation instructions included below)

## Scaling Your Cluster

The `k8s` charm provides flexibility to scale your cluster as needed by adding
or removing control plane nodes or worker nodes.

To increase the control plane's capacity or ensure [high availability], you
can add more units of the `k8s` application:

```
juju add-unit k8s -n 1
```

Use `juju status` to view all the units in your cluster and monitor their
status.

Similarly, you can add more worker nodes when your workload demands increase:

```
juju add-unit k8s-worker -n 1
```

This command deploys an additional instance of the `k8s-worker` charm. No extra

> configurations is needed as Juju manages all instances within the same

Reviewer: ```suggestion
configuration is needed as Juju manages all instances within the same
```

application. After running this command, new units will appear in your cluster,
such as `k8s-worker/0` and `k8s-worker/1`.

To scale up multiple units at once, adjust the unit count:

```
juju add-unit k8s-worker -n 3
```

If you need to scale down the cluster, you can remove units as follows:

```
juju remove-unit k8s-worker/1
```

Replace the unit name with the appropriate application name (e.g., `k8s` or
`k8s-worker`) and unit number.

## Set up `kubectl`

[kubectl] is the standard upstream tool for interacting with a Kubernetes
cluster. This is the command that can be used to inspect and manage your
cluster.

> If necessary `kubectl`, it can be installed from a snap:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If necessary, `kubectl` can be installed from a snap:
```

# Basic operations with the charm

This tutorial walks you through common management tasks for your {{ product }}
cluster using the `k8s` charm. You'll learn how to scale your cluster, manage
workers, and interact with it using `kubectl`.

## What you will need

- A running {{ product }} cluster deployed with the `k8s` charm
- The Juju [client][Juju client]
- [Kubectl] (installation instructions included below)

## Scaling Your Cluster

The `k8s` charm provides flexibility to scale your cluster as needed by adding
or removing control plane nodes or worker nodes.

To increase the control plane's capacity or ensure high availability, you can
add more units to the `k8s` application:

```

> juju add-unit k8s -n 2

Reviewer 2: this adds 2 more units not makes the number of units = 2?

Author: Yes! Let me fix that

> # Basic operations with the charm

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Basic {{ product}} charm operations
```

This tutorial walks you through common management tasks for your {{ product }}

> cluster using the `k8s` charm. You'll learn how to scale your cluster, manage
> workers, and interact with it using `kubectl`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
cluster using the `k8s` control plane charm. You will learn how to scale your cluster, manage
workers, and interact with the cluster using `kubectl`.
```

> ## What you will need

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Prerequisites
You will need:
```

- A running {{ product }} cluster deployed with the `k8s` charm
- The Juju [client][Juju client]
- [Kubectl] (installation instructions included below)

## Scaling Your Cluster

The `k8s` charm provides flexibility to scale your cluster as needed by adding
or removing control plane nodes or worker nodes.

> To increase the control plane's capacity or ensure high availability, you can

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To increase the control plane's capacity or ensure high availability with 3+ nodes,
```
Maybe mention that you only get HA with 3 nodes? Or instead of mentioning 3 nodes link the HA guide?

> add more units to the `k8s` application:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
add more units of the `k8s` application:
```
Maybe?

```
juju add-unit k8s -n 1
```

Use `juju status` to view all the units in your cluster and monitor their
status.

```{tip}

> For high availability, we recommend deploying at least three `k8s` charm units.

Reviewer: This tip may be better one command earlier? Then you can remove the mention of HA earlier in l.18.

```

Similarly, you can add more worker nodes when your workload demands increase:

```
juju add-unit k8s-worker -n 1
```

> This command deploys an additional instance of the `k8s-worker` charm. Juju
> manages all instances within the same application, so no extra configuration
> is needed. After running this command, new units will appear in your cluster,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This command deploys an additional instance of the `k8s-worker` charm. No extra configuration
is needed as Juju manages all instances within the same application. After running this command,
new units will appear in your cluster,
```

such as `k8s-worker/0` and `k8s-worker/1`.

To scale up multiple units at once, adjust the unit count:

```
juju add-unit k8s-worker -n 3
```

If you need to scale down the cluster, you can remove units as follows:

```
juju remove-unit k8s-worker/1
```

Replace the unit name with the appropriate application name (e.g., `k8s` or
`k8s-worker`) and unit number.

## Set up `kubectl`

> [kubectl][] is the standard upstream tool for interacting with a Kubernetes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[kubectl][Kubectl] is the standard upstream tool for interacting with a Kubernetes
```
Do we need this for the link to work?

Author: This is working fine without the hyperlink name being capitalized. I’ll remove the other set of brackets. Thanks!

cluster. This is the command that can be used to inspect and manage your
cluster.

> If you don't already have `kubectl`, it can be installed from a snap:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If necessary, `kubectl` can be installed from a snap:
```

```
sudo snap install kubectl --classic
```

> If you have just installed it, you should also create a file to contain
> the configuration:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create a directory to house the kubeconfig:
```

```
mkdir ~/.kube
```

> To fetch the configuration information from the cluster we can run:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Fetch the configuration information from the cluster:
```

```
juju run k8s/0 get-kubeconfig
```

The Juju action is a piece of code which runs on a unit to perform a specific
task. In this case it collects the cluster information - the YAML formatted
details of the cluster and the keys required to connect to it.

```{warning}

> If you already have `kubectl` and are using it to manage other clusters, you
> should edit the relevant parts of the cluster yaml output and append them to
> your current kubeconfig file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you already have `kubectl` installed and are using it to manage other clusters, edit the
relevant parts of the cluster yaml output and append them to
your current kubeconfig file.
```

```

> We can use pipe to append your cluster's kubeconfig information directly to a
> config file which will just require a bit of editing:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use the pipe operator to append your cluster's kubeconfig information directly to the
config file:
```

```
juju run k8s/0 get-kubeconfig >> ~/.kube/config
```

> The output includes the root of the YAML, `kubeconfig: |`, so we can just use an
> editor to remove that line:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The output includes the root of the YAML, `kubeconfig: |`. Please use the editor of your choice
to delete the first line and save the file:
```

```
vim ~/.kube/config
```

> 
> Please use the editor of your choice to delete the first line and save the file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Alternatively, if you are a `yq` user, the same can be achieved with:

```
juju run k8s/0 get-kubeconfig | yq '.kubeconfig' -r >> ~/.kube/config

> ```

Reviewer: This seems easier (less error-prone) why don't we remove the editor suggestion?

Author: Yeah, let's remove the editor part.  `yq` is available in most distros as package/snap.

> You can now confirm `kubectl` can read the kubeconfig file:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Confirm that `kubectl` can read the kubeconfig file:
```

```
kubectl config show
```

> ...which should output something like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The output will be similar to this:
```

```
apiVersion: v1
clusters:
- cluster:
    certificate-authority-data: DATA+OMITTED
    server: https://10.158.52.236:6443
  name: k8s
contexts:
- context:
    cluster: k8s
    user: k8s-user
  name: k8s
current-context: k8s
kind: Config
preferences: {}
users:
- name: k8s-user
  user:
    token: REDACTED
```

> You can then further confirm that it is possible to inspect the cluster by
> running a simple command such as :

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Run a simple command to inspect your cluster:
```

```
kubectl get pods -A
```

> This should return some pods, confirming the command can reach the cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This command returns a list of pods, confirming that `kubectl` can reach the cluster.
```

## Next steps

> Now that you're familiar with basic cluster operations, you might want to:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now that you are familiar with the basic cluster operations, learn to:
```

add more units to the `k8s` application:

```
juju add-unit k8s -n 1
```

```{tip}
For high availability, we recommend deploying at least three `k8s` charm units.

> Use `juju status` to view all the units in your cluster and monitor their

Reviewer 2: Suggestion: I would put the status above the tip
